High up in the Turkish Taurus Mountains, meltwater
streams collect into two major drainage basins,
giving birth to the Euphrates and Tigris rivers.
While their closest headwaters lie just a few
hundred meters apart, it won’t be for another
1000 kilometers that these rivers become united.
As the longest and most influential rivers of
western Asia, they are winding their way down
from the Armenian Highlands, rapidly growing
in size. While crossing Syria, the three
largest tributaries are joining the course of the
Euphrates and by the time the river enters Iraq,
it has reached its maximum size. Leaving the
semi-arid steppe behind and entering the true
desert of Iraq, no more natural tributaries join the
rivers course and man made water management canals
start defining the hydrological system.
Roughly 190 kilometers before the delta,
the channels of the Euphrates and Tigris
finally merge in the city of Al Qurnah,
forming the Shatt Al-Arab, which brings
the united waters to the Persian Gulf.
Throughout this journey, dams, canals, floodwater
catchments and irrigation schemes have made the
system one of the most altered on earth.
The state-led Southeast Anatolia Project
turned the Turkish Euphrates into
a chain of hydropower reservoirs,
culminating in the Atatürk Dam which has been
widely criticised for shifting leverage upstream
and giving Turkey the ability to drastically
curb flows on the Euphrates river.
Further downstream, human impact shifts from
mega-dams to extensive canal and irrigation
projects, linking the mid sections of
the Euphrates and Tigris together and
sustaining a large-scale agricultural
zone amidst the arid desert of central
Iraq. The most important agriculturalzone
however, lies between confluence and the delta.
The so-called Mesopotamian marshes have
been populated for thousands of years
and are widely regarded as the birthplace of
civilization. Abundant edible crops but a lack
of precipitation lead to the first irrigation
channels and water management projects in human
history. To manage this, the first writing and
accounting systems were invented by the Sumerians,
turning grain, labor, and water rights
into records, which eventually led to
bureaucracy and the first civilizations.
What once was an extensive marsh land with
seasonal inundated wetland, has been transformed
beyond recognition in the second part of the 20th
century. Dikes and redistribution channels
confined the waters to their normal river
channels, reclaiming the marshlands for
agriculture and oil exploration, leading
to over 90% of the wetland drying up and falling
to human use between the 1970s and 2003. With the
fall of Saddam Hussein, who was a major driver
in the eradication of the natural marshland,
revitalization in the region has started,
but with ever increasing flow reduction
due to irrigation needs and upstream dams,
this ecosystem may never be restored again.
If you are curious about how other rivers
shape civilizations, I have a whole playlist,
exploring the most important rivers of our
planet here. See you in the next one, cheers.